# Time Value of Money

Financial statements help us estimate future cash flows generated by the company, but we still need to decide what is the value of these future cash flows at the moment when we evaluate them.

## Present and Future Values

The first step in time value analysis is to set up a timeline with an initial year and a given scale. **Present value** is the today's value of a future cash flow of series of cash flows. The **future value** on the other hand is the amount to which a cash flow will grow over a given period of time.

The future value is derived from the present value by the process of compounding. In general, when compounding with interest rate $i$ over $t$ periods, we can calculate the future value as:
$$
\text{Future value} = (1 + i)^t \times \text{Present value}
$$
The interest rat that we use is referred as the **opportunity cost**, the rate of return we could earn on an alternative investment of similar risk.

## Annuities

Annuities are payments that are constant and repeated over a fixed period of time. There are two types of annuities:

- **Ordinary Annuity**: The first payment is due at the end of the first period.
- **Annuity Due**: The first payment is due at the beginning of the first period.

The future value of an ordinal annuity with a fixed payment ($\text{PMT}$), interest $i$ and $t$ periods can be calculated as:
$$
\text{Future value} = \text{PMT} \times \frac{(1+i)^t-1}{i}
$$
The present value can be calculated as:
$$
\text{Present value} = \text{PMT} \times \frac{1- \frac{1}{(1+i)^t}}{i}
$$

## Perpetuities

Perpetuities behave similar to annuities, but they have an infinite number of payments. Their present value can be calculated as:
$$
\text{Present value} = \frac{\text{PMT}}{i}
$$

 ## Uneven Cash Flows

Most of the analyzed cash flows are not constant over time. There are two important classes of uneven cash flows:

- A stream that consist of a series of annuity payments plus an additional final lump sum. Bonds are a good example of this.
- All other uneven streams. Stock and capital investments are part of this group.

The future value of a uneven cash flow is obtained calculating the the values of cash flow $(\text{CF})$ and their corresponding interest:
$$
\text{Future value} = \sum_{t=1}^T \text{CF}_t \times (1+i)^{T-t}
$$
The present value is calculated in a similar fashion:
$$
\text{Present value} = \sum_{t=1}^T \frac {\text{CF}_t}{(1+i)^t}
$$

## Comparing Interest Rates

Interest can be compounded on any time period, not only in years. In order to correctly compare different interest rates, we need to normalize them to an annual rate. For this we need to implement two conversions:

1. Convert the stated interest rate into a periodic rate:
   $$
   \text{Periodic rate} = \frac{\text{Stated annual rate}}{\text{Number of payments per year}}
   $$

2. Convert the number of years into number of periods:
   $$
   \text{Number of Periods} = \text{Number of years} \times \text{Periods per year}
   $$

The **nominal effective rate** is the annual percentage rate, or quoted rate. We can find the **effective nominal rate** given the nominal effective rate $(i_{nom})$he number of compounding periods per year $(M)$ with the following equation:
$$
\text{Effective Nominal Rate} = \left(1+\frac {i_{nom}}{M}\right)^M-1
$$

## Amortized Loans

Amortized loans are paid off in equal installments over time. The present and future value are calculated in the same way as annuities.

