# Assignment 2

## 4

### D

> Prove the following formulas ($P$ and $Q$ are unary predicates, $S$ is a 0-ary predicate, $T$ is a predicate of arity 2, and $f$ and $g$ are unary function symbols):
> $$
> [\exists x.S \implies Q(x)] \implies[S \implies \exist x . Q(x)]
> $$

First, we can make the following assumptions based on the rules we saw on the first class.
$$
\array{
\text{My assumptions: } && \\
&& \exists x.S \implies Q(x)\\
&& S

\\\\
\text{To prove: }&& \exist x . Q(x)
}
$$
Now, we can generate knowledge using our first and second assumption:

- For the existential quantifier: let $a$ be such that $S \implies Q(a)$ is valid, we can add $S \implies Q(a)$ to our assumptions.
- For $S \implies Q(a)$, we also know that $S$ holds, so we can add $Q(a)$ to our assumptions.

$$
\array{
\text{My assumptions: } && \\
&& \exists x.S \implies Q(x)\\
&& S \\
&& S \implies Q(a)\\
&& Q(a)
\\\\
\text{To prove: }&& \exist x . Q(x)
}
$$

And to prove the last existential quantifier, we choose $x = a$, and from our assumptions we know that $Q(a)$ holds, so the proof is finished.

### E

> Prove the following formulas ($P$ and $Q$ are unary predicates, $S$ is a 0-ary predicate, $T$ is a predicate of arity 2, and $f$ and $g$ are unary function symbols):
> $$
> [\neg \exists x\exists y. T(x,y)] \implies [\forall x \neg T(f(g(x)),f(x))]
> $$

$$
\array{
\text{My assumptions: } && \\
&& [\neg \exists x\exists y. T(x,y)]\\
&& \text{ let $a$ be an arbitrary but fixed variable}\\
&& T(f(g(a)),f(a))\\
&& T(f(g(a)),f(a)) \implies \exists x \exists y. T(x,y) \text{ LEMMA} \\
&& \exists x \exists y. T(x,y)

\\\\
\text{To prove: }&&    \neg T(f(g(a)),f(a))
}
$$

I have to prove the LEMMA. Then I have a contradiction and I solved this.

### F

> dfdf

$$
\array{
\text{prove:} && \exists x.P(x) \implies S\\
\text{assume:}&&\\
&& [\forall x.P(x)] \implies S\\
&&[\neg \exists x. \neg P(x)] \lor [ \exists x. \neg P(x)] \text{ LEMMA}\\

\text{Case 1:} &&\\
&& \exists a. \neg P(x)\\
&& \neg P(a)\\
&& P(a)\\

\text{prove:} && S \text{  DONE}



}
$$



## 5

> The goal of Exercise 2b was to develop a specification for string search. Assume that the result only returns the output 1, if the given string is contained in the input text, and 0, if it is not contained. Extend this specification with a certificate,

Here we can see the algorithm from exercise 2B:
$$
\bold{\text{Input}}: \text{ array $a$,$b$ where } ca,cb \in \text{ASCII}\land ca \in a \land cb \in b\\
\bold{\text{Output}}: t=1 \text{ if $a$ is a substring of $b$, $t=0$ otherwise}
$$

### A

>  for the case when the answer is 1 (describe the certificate informally, using natural language)

$$
[i  >-1 \\\land\\ [\text{length}(a)+i < \text{length}(b) \lor \text{length}(a)+i = \text{length}(b)] \\\land\\ \forall j \in \{i,\dots,\text{lenght}(a)+i-1\}. a[j] = b[j]]\\
\land \\
(\neg i = -1 \land t = 1)
$$

### C

>  for the case when the answer is 0 (describe the certificate formally, using predicate logic).

$$
[i  >-1 \\\land\\ [\text{length}(a)+i < \text{length}(b) \lor \text{length}(a)+i = \text{length}(b)] \\\land\\ \forall j \in \{i,\dots,\text{lenght}(a)+i-1\}. a[j] = b[j]]\\
\land \\
(i = -1 \land t = 0)
$$

## 6

> In the following, the variable name l refers to lists, a refers to arrays, i, j, k refer to non-negative integers. The variables x, y refer to array/list elements which you may assume to be integers. For all other variable names, and any constant that you use, you can assign types as you want. You can find examples in Section 2.3 of the preliminary lecture notes (the examples might give you important hints).

### C

> In theory of arrays, prove:
> $$
> \exists a,i,j,x. \text{ write}(a,i,x)[j] \neq x
> $$

In this exercise we have to prove that there exists an array with the $x$ value at position $i$ and that it doesn't have an $x$ at position $j$.
$$
\exists a,i,j,x. \text{ write}(a,i,x)[j] \neq x
$$
We can set the array $a$ as $[y,\ ,\ ]$ with $i = 3$ and $j=1$, so we have:
$$
\text{write}(\text{write}(a,0,y),3,x)[1] \neq x
$$
  And we can see that out array is represented as:
$$
\text{write}(\text{write}(a,0,y),3,x) = [y,\ ,\ , x]
$$
And we can see that at the position $1$, there is no element, so it is different from $x$.

### D

>  In the theory of arrays, prove:
> $$
> \forall a,i, j, x . \text{write}(a, i, x)[j] = x ⇒ [i = j ∨ a[j] = x]
> $$

Let $a,i,j,x$ be arbitrary but fixed variables such $\text{write}(a, i, x)[j] = x$
$$
 [i = j ∨ a[j] = x]
$$
We have to evaluate two cases:

- If $i=j$, then the formula holds because:
  $$
  \top \lor \text{?} = \top
  $$

- if $i \neq i$, then based on our assumption we wrote the element $x$ to another position that is not $j$, but if we look in the element number $j$ of the array we can still find the element $x$. This means that $a[j]=x$ before even writing to it, so the formula holds:
  $$
  ? \lor \top = \top
  $$

$$
\array{
\text{assumptions:}&&\\
&& \text{write}(a,i,x)[j] = x \\
&& \neg i=j\\
&& i\neq j \implies \text{write}(a,u,x)[j] = a[j]\\
&& \text{write}(a,u,x)[j] = a[j]\\
&& \forall x,y. (x = y) \implies P(x) \implies P(y) (Lemma)\\
\\\\
\text{prove:}&&\\
&&  a[j] = x
}
$$


$$
\forall x,y. (x = y) \implies P(x) \implies P(y)\\
P(\alpha) \equiv \alpha = x
\\\\
LEMA:\\
\text{write}(a,i,x)[j] = a[j] \iplies 
$$

# Extra

## 1

$$
l = \text{cons}(x,\text{cons}(y,\text{cons}(2,\empty))) \implies \text{fst}(\text{rest}(l)) = \text{const}(2,\empty)
$$

